{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1504\cocoasubrtf830
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Verdana;\f1\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\csgenericrgb\c50196\c0\c0;\csgenericrgb\c50196\c0\c0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww21520\viewh15560\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\li84\fi7\ri720\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\i\b\fs22 \cf2 Natural Selection Controls\
\pard\pardeftab720\li84\fi7\ri720\partightenfactor0

\f1\i0\b0\fs12 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li84\fi7\ri720\partightenfactor0

\fs20 \cf0 Fundamentally, natural selection is the product of the survival of young to adulthood times the reproductive success of the survivors. Most evolution simulations allow students to enter 
\i relative fitness
\i0  values that are several steps removed from the basic processes of survival and reproduction. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li84\fi7\ri720\partightenfactor0

\fs12 \cf0 \

\f0\i\b\fs20 \cf2 Reproduction and Survival Radio Button
\fs18 \

\f1\i0\b0\fs20 \cf0 By default this option is checked and requires entry of two parameters for each genotype. We recommend that students start with this so they get a feel for the relationship of survival, reproduction, and fitness. Later they can change to the shortcut of the 
\f0\i\fs18 Absolute Fitness 
\f1\i0\fs20 radio button (see below).\

\f0\b\fs16 \cf2 Survival Rates Parameters 
\b0 \cf0 (decimal, 0.0\'961.0)
\b \cf2 \

\i\b0\fs18 \cf0 Survival rates
\f1\i0\b\fs20  
\b0 may range from 0.0 for a lethal genotype to 1.0 (or 100%) for one that cannot die before reproducing \'97 obviously unrealistic.\

\f0\b\fs16 \cf2 Reproductive Rates Parameters\cf3  
\b0 \cf0 (decimal, 0.0\'961.0)
\b \cf2 \

\i\b0\fs18 \cf0 Reproductive rates
\f1\i0\b\fs20  
\b0 may range from 0.0 for a sterile genotype to 10.0 for a high reproductive rate.\

\fs6 \

\f0\b\fs16 \cf2 Absolute Fitness Parameters\

\f1\b0\fs20 \cf0 The 
\f0\i\fs16 Absolute Fitness
\fs18  
\f1\i0\fs20 values are grayed because they are calculated as 
\f0\i\fs16 Survival Rate * Reproductive Rate
\f1\i0\fs20  after you enter survival and reproductive rates.\

\fs6 \

\f2\fs18 Values above 1.0 indicate that reproduction exceeds mortality and the genotype\'92s offspring will more than compensate for mortality. E.g., consider 100 young of a particular genotype; if survival is 0.5, then roughly 50 will survive to adulthood. If reproduction is 2.1, then 0.5*2.1 = 1.05 and the 50 adults will produce around 105 young. If one or more 
\f0\i\fs16 Absolute Fitness
\fs18  
\f2\i0 is less than 1.0, the population may decline to extinction.\

\f1\fs6 \

\f0\b\fs16 \cf2 Relative Fitness Parameters
\f1 \

\f0\i\b0 \cf0 Relative fitness
\f1\i0\fs20  values are always calculated by dividing each genotype\'92s absolute fitness by the highest absolute fitness. The relative fitness of the genotype with the highest absolute fitness will always be 1.0. Genotypes with lower values will be at a relative disadvantage and will tend to decrease in frequency. E.g., a genotype with a relative fitness of 0.75 will be only 75% as successful (will be at a 25% deficit) relative to the most successful.\

\fs6 \

\f0\i\b\fs20 \cf2 Absolute Fitness Radio Button
\fs18 \

\f1\i0\b0\fs20 \cf0 Entering survival and reproductive rates is tedious, especially with three alleles where there are 6 genotypes for a total of 12 parameters. Consequently, more advanced students can use this option to cut their parameter entry in half by entering only 
\f0\i\fs16 Absolute Fitness
\f1\i0\fs20  values. The 
\f0\i\fs16 Relative Fitnesses
\f1\i0\fs20  will be computed automatically\
}