{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1504\cocoasubrtf830
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Verdana;\f1\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red128\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\csgenericrgb\c50196\c0\c0;\csgenericrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww21580\viewh16040\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\li86\fi8\ri720\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs26 \cf2 INITIAL POPULATION
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li86\fi8\ri720\partightenfactor0

\b0\fs12 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\fs20 \cf0 This section sets up the starting population for all of the subpopulations in the experimental run.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\fs12 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs16 \cf2 Number of Generations
\f1\b0\fs20 \cf0  (integer, 10\'96)
\f0\b\fs16 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs20 \cf0 Determines the number of generations EVOLVE will run before displaying the graph of results. Start with 100 generations and adjust as needed (don\'92t enter commas). There is no upper limit to the number of generations, but large values (above about 10,000) may result in long run times if there are many populations or a complex scenario. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs16 \cf2 Number of Populations
\f1\b0\fs20 \cf0  (integer, 1\'96)
\f0\b\fs16 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs20 \cf0 Running with more than 1 population allows you to get a feel for the sort of variations that can occur due to random variations in the course of evolution. A value of 10 is a good start; you can increase it if needed. Again, large values can increase run times.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\fs6 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\fs20 \cf0 To study migration, you must run multiple subpopulations. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs16 \cf2 Population Size
\f1\b0\fs20 \cf0  (integer, 10\'96)
\f0\b\fs16 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs20 \cf0 This value, along with the 
\f0\i\fs16 Initial Allele Frequencies
\f1\i0\fs20  determines the makeup of the first generation. If there are multiple subpopulations they are identical in the first generation.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\fs6 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\fs20 \cf0 EVOLVE sets no limit on the value you enter, but avoid values above 10,000 as they can result in very slow experimental runs. If you wish to study larger samples, simplify the experimental design by choosing a small number of subpopulations, etc.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\fs6 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs16 \cf2 Initial Population Structure\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs20 \cf0 If you want to set up a Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium population, leave the
\f0\b\fs16 \cf2  
\i \cf3 Enter Allele Frequencies
\f1\b0\fs20  
\i0 Radio button checked \cf0 and enter a frequency for the A allele; the frequency of the B allele is calculated for you. If you are simulating three alleles, you must enter a frequency for B and the C allele will be calculated.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\fs6 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\fs20 \cf0 If you wish to start with a non\'96equilibrium population, click the 
\f0\i\b\fs16 Enter Genotype Numbers
\f1\i0\b0\fs20  radio button and enter specific integers for each genotype. They will need to add up to the 
\f0\i\fs16 Population Size
\f1\i0\fs20 . E.g., if you wish to see what happens to a single mutant A allele in a population of 100, enter 0 in the 
\f0\i\fs18 AA
\f1\i0\fs20  box, 1 in 
\f0\i\fs18 AB
\f1\i0\fs20  and 99 in 
\f0\i\fs18 BB
\f1\i0\fs20  (make sure the initial 
\f0\i\fs16 Population Size
\f1\i0\fs20  was set to 100).\
}