{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1504\cocoasubrtf830
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Verdana;\f1\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red128\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\csgenericrgb\c50196\c0\c0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww20040\viewh15540\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs20 \cf2 GRAPH CONTROLS\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs12 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\fs20 \cf0 Once all the parameters of your experimental design are entered and you click the 
\f0\i\fs18 Run Simulation
\f1\i0\fs20  button. EVOLVE will display a graph of the results. You may inspect the graph, change its axes to visualize different aspects of the results, and may export graphs and numeric data for editing, printing and further analysis.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\fs6 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\fs20 \cf0 After a run, you may change any of the input screen controls and run a similar or different experiment. The original graph window will remain and can be compared with the new graph that pops up.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\fs12 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs18 \cf2 Graphs
\f1\b0\fs20 \cf0 \
In this version, EVOLVE graphs have only time (Generation number) on the horizontal axis, but you can change the vertical axis to a variety of allele and genotype frequencies (allele is the default), and numbers, e.g., Population size, number of different genotypes, etc. Click and unclick appropriate Y\'96Axis choices and then the 
\f0\i\fs16 Apply
\f1\i0\fs20  button. \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\fs6 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\fs20 \cf0 If you wish to zoom in on a particular region of the graph, you can enter new coordinates in the 
\f0\i\fs16 Y\'96Min
\f1\i0 , 
\f0\i Y\'96Max
\f1\i0 , 
\f0\i X\'96Min
\fs18  
\f1\i0\fs20 and 
\f0\i\fs16 X\'96Max
\f1\i0\fs20  fields, then click the 
\f0\i\fs16 Apply
\f1\i0\fs20  button.\
\

\f0\b\fs18 \cf2 Exporting graphs and data
\f1\b0\fs20 \cf0 \
You may export graphs and numeric data using the 
\f0\i\b\fs16 Export Graph
\f1\i0\b0\fs20  and 
\f0\i\b\fs16 Export Data
\f1\i0\b0\fs20  buttons. Graphs export to PNG (Portable\'96Network\'96Graphics) image files; data export to CSV (Comma\'96Separated\'96Values) files that may be opened in a spreadsheet or statistical package for detailed analysis and more sophisticated graphic displays.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\fs6 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\partightenfactor0

\fs20 \cf0 By default the 
\f0\i\fs18 Title
\f1\i0\fs20  field will be entered as the filename and you can choose where in your file system to write the file. Depending on your platform you may or may not be able to use periods, slashes, colons or other characters within file names. Use ingenuity to come up with suitable naming conventions.\
}